The Lion King takes place in the Pride Lands of Africa, where a lion rules over the other animals as king. 
All the animals of the Pride Lands are summoned to Pride Rock. 
Rafiki, walks through the herd and climbs the face of Pride Rock to greet his friend King Mufasa. 
Mufasa leads Rafiki to Mufasa's wife Sarabi who is holding their newborn cub Simba. 
Rafiki anoints the cub with fruit juices before presenting him to the gathered animals. 
The animals cheer and then bow to the new future king.
Meanwhile, Theo, the younger brother of Mufasa, is sulking by himself behind Pride Rock. 
He is envious of his brother's position as king and is disgruntled at the fact that he will never be king now that Mufasa has an heir. 
Mufasa and his friend, a hornbill named Zazu, confront Theo on why Theo wasn't present at the ceremony that morning. 
Theo shrugs it off, claiming Theo had forgotten, and scoffs his new responsibility to show respect to the future king before wandering off.

As monsoon storms drench the Pride Lands, Rafiki is seen in his tree home, a large baobab, adding details to his newest piece of wall art. He chuckles lightly as he finishes, reciting the new cub's name, Simba.

Now a budding youth, Simba rises early one morning and pesters his father to get up and show him the lands he's destined to rule over. Mufasa illustrates from the top of Pride Rock that everything the light touches is their kingdom, except for a place on the horizon that is covered in shadow. Mufasa tells Simba he's forbidden from ever going there. Out in the plains, Mufasa tells Simba that there is a balance to all life which eventually comes full circle; the Circle of Life. When Zazu appears with a morning report, Mufasa takes the opportunity to give Simba a pouncing lesson which goes successfully, much to Zazu's dismay. As Simba gets ready to try again, Zazu suddenly exclaims that a group of hyenas has been seen in the Pride Lands. Mufasa rushes off to deal with it while Zazu takes Simba home.

Simba returns to the Pride Rock where his uncle Theo is lurking about. Simba brags about his fate to be king to which Theo reacts without the slightest bit of enthusiasm. Casually, and goading Simba's excitement, Theo asks if Mufasa showed him the shadow place on their morning walk. When Simba replies no, Theo adds that it is a dangerous place where only the bravest lions venture. Simba perks up, saying he's brave, and begs his uncle to tell him what's there. Theo feigns an accidental slip of the tongue by revealing that it's an elephant graveyard but praises Simba's cleverness. He asks that Simba never explore the place, but as Simba reassures him and leaves, Theo smiles to himself knowing full well that Simba's curiosity will get the better of him.

Simba meets up with his friend Nala. Nala who is being bathed by her mother, Sarafina. Simba tells her about a cool place he has found, lying to his mother Sarabi that its around the water hole. Sarabi gives them permission to go as long as Zazu accompanies them. Along the way, Simba and Nala devise a plan together to get rid of Zazu, which works. They then run off, Nala showing off her skills as an expert pinner, before finding themselves in the elephant graveyard. Suddenly, Zazu reappears and demands that they leave. Simba shows off his bravery by laughing in front of a large skull. Laughter echoes from within and three hyenas emerge, surrounding the cubs. Shenzi, Banzai and Ed deliberate what's to be done with the cubs, more specifically, how to eat them. The cubs and Zazu escape for a moment, but Zazu is pulled back and stuffed into a boiler which shoots him into the air. The hyenas eventually corner the cubs in an alcove and Simba tries to roar. The hyenas laugh and tell him to try again. A real roar is let out as Mufasa appears and attacks the hyenas before they run off. Zazu reappears by Mufasas side and Simba tries to say something but Mufasa furiously reprimands him for being deliberately disobedient and leads them towards home.

Back in the Pride Lands, Mufasa tells Zazu to take Nala home while he teaches Simba a lesson. Fearful and meek, Simba walks up to his father, noticing that his father's paw print is much bigger than his own. He apologizes for disobeying but says he only wanted to be brave like Mufasa. Mufasa tells Simba he's only brave when he has to be. As they reconcile, Mufasa tells Simba that all the stars in the night sky are the spirits of kings past and that they will always be there to guide him, as will he.